Unity Catalog is the central governance and security layer in Databricks.

In simple words, it helps companies manage who can access which data, track where the data came from, and control data across different Databricks workspaces.

Databricks defines Unity Catalog as a unified governance layer that provides centralized access control, lineage, auditing, and data discovery across workspaces.

Easy explanation

Before Unity Catalog, each Databricks workspace could manage tables, permissions, and metadata separately. That made governance difficult.

With Unity Catalog, you can manage everything centrally:

Metastore
   └── Catalog
        └── Schema / Database
             └── Tables / Views / Volumes / Functions



Example:

SELECT * 
FROM main.sales.customer_orders;

Here:

main     = catalog
sales    = schema
customer_orders = table
Why Unity Catalog is used

Unity Catalog is used for:

Access control
You can give permissions like SELECT, CREATE, or MODIFY to users, groups, or service principals.

Data lineage
It tracks how data moves from source to target, for example from Bronze to Silver to Gold tables.

Auditing
It helps monitor who accessed data, when they accessed it, and what changes were made.

Data discovery
Users can search and understand available tables, columns, owners, and descriptions.

Governance for sensitive data
It helps protect PII, financial data, healthcare data, and other confidential information.

Interview answer

You can say:

Unity Catalog is Databricks’ centralized governance layer for managing data access, metadata, lineage, auditing, and discovery across workspaces. In my project, it can be used to control access to Bronze, Silver, and Gold tables, manage permissions for different teams, track data lineage, and ensure secure handling of sensitive data such as PII. It helps improve data governance, compliance, and trust in the Lakehouse platform.

Example in your project

In a Medallion Architecture project:

Bronze: raw candidate/job/application data
Silver: cleaned and standardized data
Gold: business-ready reporting tables

Unity Catalog helps control access like this:

Data Engineers → full access to Bronze, Silver, Gold
Analysts → access only to Gold tables
HR/Business users → access only to approved dashboards or views
ML team → access to feature-engineered datasets

So, Unity Catalog makes the Databricks Lakehouse more secure, governed, and organized.