Ecosystem of Hadoop Framework


HDFS Architecture(Storage Layer)
-it has 2 main built in servers
1. NameNode
2. DataNode

- it follows master slave architecture i.e. it has 1 main node which control the system and multiple worker nodes(perform tasks)

-it has 3 main components
1. NameNode- Master of HDFS cluster
Tasks: Manage File system Namespace(file names, directory structures, file locs)
       Control client access(when user access the file, the request first dent to namenode which tells which datanode contain the file blocks)
       File operation(rw, rename, creating directory)
E.g: It acts as library manager

2. DataNode- worker node, every machines in the cluster has 1 datanode, aids in block creation, block deletion, block replication
Tasks: Stores actual data
       read and write blocks
       Manage block replication
E.g: It acts as a book shelves

3. Block- Data Storage unit, block is the smallest unit of data that HDFS can read and write which is of 128 MB

Suppose you have uploaded a file size 300MB
First, HDFS will split the file into 3 blocks as follow:
Block1-> 128MB
Block2-> 128MB
Block3-> 44MB
Each block will get replicated on 3 datanodes to ensure fault tolerance.

In HDFS, moving computation near data means executing processing tasks on the nodes where data resides, minimizing data transfer and improving performance.
Hadoop move computation to where data exists means it sends processing program t the machine where data is stored.


If datanode is fail: 
DataNode fails → No heartbeat → NameNode detects → Uses replica → Creates new replica → System continues
Thus no data will be lost.



MapReduce Layer(Processing Layer)
Allows: Process huge datasets, run tasks in parallel, uses cluster of commodity hardware

Map Function: processes input data-> converts into key value pair, thus it breaks large data into small pieces
Reduce Function: Takes output from map function as an input and combines similar keys and produces a final result.
Both Map and reduce function are written in Java.

When a user upload a file of certain size, the following action occurs:
Client-> YARN(Resource Management)-> HDFS Stage-> where File splited into blocks-> blocks stored in datanodes-> Map phase occurs->Shuffle and sorting phase->Reduce phase-> final output which again stored in HDFS





  