AWS- Amazon Web Server

IAM
https://447444645163.signin.aws.amazon.com/console

Copying Romeo.txt file from local machine to Linux machine in data folder

scp -i EC2_KeyValuePair.pem romeo.txt ubuntu@ec2-18-221-54-139.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:~/data


cp-copying from same machine
scp-copying from two different machine



Copying file from data folder of ubuntu to local machine
scp -i "EC2_KeyValuePair.pem" ubuntu@ec2-18-221-54-139.us-east-2.compute.amazonaws.com:~/data/abc.txt .

IAM(Identity and Access Management)
IAM in AWS is used to securely manage access to resources by defining users, roles, and permissions. It ensures that only authorized entities can access specific services based on least privilege principles.

1. EC2
Stands for Elastic Compute Cloud.
It is a service that lets you rent virtual servers (computers) in the cloud.

EC2 is a cloud service where you can create and run virtual machines on AWS.

2. S3
Stands for Simple Storage Service.
It’s a cloud service used to store and retrieve any amount of data from anywhere.

S3 is a scalable cloud storage service where data is stored as objects inside buckets without managing servers.
Act as a central storage layer
In our class, we try to create s3 bucket, upload some files and try accessing s3 from EC2

BOTO3-Python SDK for AWS (Amazon Web Services).
It lets you interact with AWS services using Python code.

With boto3, you can:
Upload files to S3
Launch EC2 instances
Read/write DynamoDB data
Work with Lambda, IAM, Glue, Redshift, etc.

AWS CLI- tool that lets you interact with Amazon Web Services (AWS)
directly from your terminal or command prompt.
Manage cloud resources (EC2 instances, S3 buckets, databases, etc.)
Automate tasks using scripts
Deploy applications
Configure infrastructure without using the web console

3 popular ways to access AWS service
1. AWS console
2. AWS CLI
3. BOTO3

3. Glue
Fully managed serverless ETL service which consists of a central metadata repository- Glue Data Catalog-> Crawlers->ETL Job
Manual schema 

AWS Key Features
1. Data Discovery
2. ETL
3. Data Catalog

Typical flow:

Data source (S3, RDS, etc.)
Crawler scans data → creates schema(infers schema automatically and creates table in data catalog)
Data Catalog stores metadata
Glue Job (Spark-based) transforms data(which uses Apache spark transform data)
Output to S3 / Redshift / other systems
Flexible scheduler which aids in orchestration 

Actually glue starts running ETL job in Apache spark, where we don't have to manage or deploy spark servers .. Glue will do it itself we just have to write code and run them

Metadata in AWS Data Catalog is the descriptive information about data, such as schema, location, and format, which helps services like Athena and Glue understand and process the data without storing the actual data itself.

AWS Glue Connectors: connectors are used to connect Glue with different data sources and destinations. It act like bridges that allow you to read/write data from various systems.

4. AWS Lambda- serverless compute service
AWS Lambda is a serverless compute service that lets you run code without managing servers.

You simply:

Write your code
Upload it to Lambda
AWS automatically runs it when triggered

Instead of:
creating servers
installing software
managing scaling
Lambda handles all of that automatically.

AWS Redshift
Architecture: Master Slave Architecture
i.e. Leader Node and compute node-> it lets the data evenly distributed 

i. Leader Node: handles- metadata, query planning and coordination
ii. Compute Node: worker machines and have actual data processing

Hashing decides which row should go to which compute node.

Distribution Style
All Distribution 
Even Distribution 
Key Distribution

Sort Keys: a sort key determines the order in which data is physically stored on disk inside a table.

It helps Redshift skip unnecessary data blocks while scanning, making queries much faster.

distkey: a DISTKEY (Distribution Key) decides how data is distributed across compute nodes in a cluster.

It directly impacts query performance, especially for joins and aggregations.
DISTKEY helps minimize data movement.









