RDD(Resilient Distributed Datasets): A core building block of Pyspark
Fault tolerant
Immutable
Distributed computation


Partitioning ways:
1. Partitioning the data during the creation of RDD
2. Partition an existing RDD- Repartition() or Coalesec()

Repartition- Reshuffle the data
Adjusts the number of partitions, redistributing data across the specified number of partitions.
Can be expensive, especially for large datasets, as it involves a full shuffle of data.
Distributes data across partitions evenly, potentially leading to balanced partition sizes.
Use Case: When changing the number of partitions or evenly distributing data across partitions.


Coalesec()- Reduces the number of partitions without shuffling data, merging existing partitions. so, the sequence of data is same
Less expensive than because it minimizes data movement.
May result in imbalanced partition sizes, especially when reducing the number of partitions.
Use Case: When decreasing the number of partitions without incurring the cost of a full shuffle.


{Coalesec() in SQL- It returns null values}

RDD supports two types of operations:
1. RDD Transformation: Operations which creates new RDD by applying computation or manipulation on the data.
Transformation is lazy operations.
When executed in a single or multiple new RDD.
Since RDD are immutable in nature, transformation always create a new RDD without updating an existing one hence, a chain of RDD transformation creates an RDD Image.
E.G: map(), flatMap(), filter(), sortByKey()


2. RDD Action: Operations that return result or perform an action on RDD. It don't make new RDD but it result in the output.
Eagerly evaluated.
Any functions on RDD that returns other than new RDD is considered as an action.
Action functions trigger the transformation execute.
E.G: count(), show(), collect(), first(), max(), reduce()

Narrow VS Wide Transformation
1. Narrow Transformation(one to one mapping from partitions of data.
No cross movement of data happening in between partitions)
Data Movement: Data is only moved within the same partition, and each partition contributes to only one output partition. It is executed in a single stage without exchanging nodes.
E.G: map(), filter(), flatmap(), union(), sample()
Shuffling: No shuffling required between partitions.
Dependency Type: One-to-one dependency(each output partition depends on exactly one input partition)
Performance: Faster and efficient due to local data processing.
Utilization: Minimal overhead, fewer resources required.
Fault Tolerance: Easier to recover from failures, as only the local partition needs to be recomputed.
Use Case: Suitable for lightweight transformations with no need for repartitioning.

2. Wide Transformation(One to many or many to one between partitions)
Data Movement: Data is shuffled across multiple partitions, and each input partition can contribute to multiple output partitions. It often results in stage boundaries and require data exchange between nodes.
E.G: groupBy(), reduceBy(), join(), distinct()
Shuffling: Requires shuffling as data moves between partitions.
Performance: Slower in performance because of shuffling.
Utilization: Resource intensive due to shuffling and repartitions.
Fault tolerance: Requires recomputing multiple partitions due to data shuffling.
Use Case: Required for operations which need aggregation or reoperations.




